docs/installation.rst, before:

Installation
============

Requirements
------------
* As of version 0.9.0, Rosetta supports Django 1.11 and up.


Install Rosetta
---------------

1. ``pip install django-rosetta``
2. Add ``'rosetta'`` to the `INSTALLED_APPS` in your project's ``settings.py``
3. Add an URL entry to your project's ``urls.py``, for example::

    from django.conf import settings

    if 'rosetta' in settings.INSTALLED_APPS:
        urlpatterns += [
            url(r'^rosetta/', include('rosetta.urls'))
        ]


Note: you can use whatever you wish as the URL prefix.

To uninstall Rosetta, simply comment out or remove the ``'rosetta'`` line in your ``INSTALLED_APPS``


Testing
-------

``pip install tox && tox``


Security
--------

Because Rosetta requires write access to some of the files in your Django project, access to the application is restricted to the administrator user only (as defined in your project's Admin interface)

If you wish to grant editing access to other users:

1. Create a `'translators'` group in your admin interface
2. Add the user you wish to grant translating rights to this group

Commit message:

Update Installation instructions to Django 1.6+
Django 1.6 no longer automatically imports url and include.
Also, state admin login requirement.

docs/installation.rst, after:

Installation
============

Requirements
------------
* As of version 0.9.0, Rosetta supports Django 1.11 and up.


Install Rosetta
---------------

1. ``pip install django-rosetta``
2. Add ``'rosetta'`` to the `INSTALLED_APPS` in your project's ``settings.py``
3. Add an URL entry to your project's ``urls.py``, for example::

    from django.conf import settings

    if 'rosetta' in settings.INSTALLED_APPS:
        urlpatterns += [
            url(r'^rosetta/', include('rosetta.urls'))
        ]


Note: you can use whatever you wish as the URL prefix.

As of Django 1.6 you'll need::

    from django.conf import settings
    from django.conf.urls import url,include

    if 'rosetta' in settings.INSTALLED_APPS:
    urlpatterns.append(url(r'^rosetta/', include('rosetta.urls')))

You'll need to access /admin and LOGIN BEFORE ACCESSING /rosetta.

To uninstall Rosetta, simply comment out or remove the ``'rosetta'`` line in your ``INSTALLED_APPS``


Testing
-------

``pip install tox && tox``


Security
--------

Because Rosetta requires write access to some of the files in your Django project, access to the application is restricted to the administrator user only (as defined in your project's Admin interface)

If you wish to grant editing access to other users:

1. Create a `'translators'` group in your admin interface
2. Add the user you wish to grant translating rights to this group
